                 NIST Special Publication 800
                            NIST SP 800-61r3

Incident Response Recommendations
 and Considerations for Cybersecurity
                   Risk Management
                      A CSF 2.0 Community Profile

                                                 Alex Nelson
                                                Sanjay Rekhi
                                          Murugiah Souppaya
                                              Karen Scarfone

                 This publication is available free of charge from:
                       https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-61r3
                                              NIST Special Publication 800
                                                         NIST SP 800-61r3

Incident Response Recommendations
 and Considerations for Cybersecurity
                   Risk Management
                                                      A CSF 2.0 Community Profile

                                                                                    Alex Nelson
                                                                                   Sanjay Rekhi
                                                                            Murugiah Souppaya*
                                                                       Computer Security Division
                                                               Information Technology Laboratory

                                                                                      Karen Scarfone
                                                                               Scarfone Cybersecurity

                                                        *Former NIST employee; all work for this
                                                            publication was done while at NIST.

                                              This publication is available free of charge from:
                                                    https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-61r3

                                                                                               April 2025




                                                                              U.S. Department of Commerce
                                                                      Howard Lutnick, Secretary of Commerce

                                                               National Institute of Standards and Technology
   Craig Burkhardt, Acting Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology and Acting NIST Director
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                          Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                               Considerations for Cyber Risk Management


Certain equipment, instruments, software, or materials, commercial or non-commercial, are identified in this
paper in order to specify the experimental procedure adequately. Such identification does not imply
recommendation or endorsement of any product or service by NIST, nor does it imply that the materials or
equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose.

There may be references in this publication to other publications currently under development by NIST in
accordance with its assigned statutory responsibilities. The information in this publication, including concepts and
methodologies, may be used by federal agencies even before the completion of such companion publications.
Thus, until each publication is completed, current requirements, guidelines, and procedures, where they exist,
remain operative. For planning and transition purposes, federal agencies may wish to closely follow the
development of these new publications by NIST.

Organizations are encouraged to review all draft publications during public comment periods and provide feedback
to NIST. Many NIST cybersecurity publications, other than the ones noted above, are available at
https://csrc.nist.gov/publications.


Authority
This publication has been developed by NIST in accordance with its statutory responsibilities under the Federal
Information Security Modernization Act (FISMA) of 2014, 44 U.S.C. § 3551 et seq., Public Law (P.L.) 113-283. NIST is
responsible for developing information security standards and guidelines, including minimum requirements for
federal information systems, but such standards and guidelines shall not apply to national security systems
without the express approval of appropriate federal officials exercising policy authority over such systems. This
guideline is consistent with the requirements of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circular A-130.

Nothing in this publication should be taken to contradict the standards and guidelines made mandatory and
binding on federal agencies by the Secretary of Commerce under statutory authority. Nor should these guidelines
be interpreted as altering or superseding the existing authorities of the Secretary of Commerce, Director of the
OMB, or any other federal official. This publication may be used by nongovernmental organizations on a voluntary
basis and is not subject to copyright in the United States. Attribution would, however, be appreciated by NIST.


NIST Technical Series Policies
Copyright, Use, and Licensing Statements
NIST Technical Series Publication Identifier Syntax


Publication History
Approved by the NIST Editorial Review Board on 2025-03-25
Supersedes NIST SP 800-61r2 (August 2012) https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-61r2


How to Cite this NIST Technical Series Publication
Nelson A, Rekhi S, Souppaya M, Scarfone K (2025) Incident Response Recommendations and Considerations for
Cybersecurity Risk Management: A CSF 2.0 Community Profile. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-61r3. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-61r3
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                          Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                               Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Author ORCID iDs
Alex Nelson: 0000-0002-3771-570X
Sanjay Rekhi: 0009-0008-8711-4030
Murugiah Souppaya: 0000-0002-8055-8527
Karen Scarfone: 0000-0001-6334-9486


Contact Information
800-61-comments@nist.gov

National Institute of Standards and Technology
Attn: Computer Security Division, Information Technology Laboratory
100 Bureau Drive (Mail Stop 8930) Gaithersburg, MD 20899-8930


Additional Information
Additional information about this publication is available at https://csrc.nist.gov/pubs/sp/800/61/r3/final,
including related content, potential updates, and document history.


All comments are subject to release under the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA).
NIST SP 800-61r3                                             Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                  Considerations for Cyber Risk Management



Abstract
This publication seeks to assist organizations with incorporating cybersecurity incident response
recommendations and considerations throughout their cybersecurity risk management
activities as described by the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0. Doing so can help
organizations prepare for incident responses, reduce the number and impact of incidents that
occur, and improve the efficiency and effectiveness of their incident detection, response, and
recovery activities. Readers are encouraged to utilize online resources in conjunction with this
document to access additional information on implementing these recommendations and
considerations.

Keywords
cyber threat information sharing; Cybersecurity Framework; cybersecurity incident;
cybersecurity risk management; incident handling; incident management; incident response.

Reports on Computer Systems Technology
The Information Technology Laboratory (ITL) at the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (NIST) promotes the U.S. economy and public welfare by providing technical
leadership for the Nation’s measurement and standards infrastructure. ITL develops tests, test
methods, reference data, proof of concept implementations, and technical analyses to advance
the development and productive use of information technology. ITL’s responsibilities include
the development of management, administrative, technical, and physical standards and
guidelines for the cost-effective security and privacy of other than national security-related
information in federal information systems. The Special Publication 800-series reports on ITL’s
research, guidelines, and outreach efforts in information system security, and its collaborative
activities with industry, government, and academic organizations.




                                                i
NIST SP 800-61r3                                             Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                  Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Supplemental Content
NIST has established an Incident Response project page that hosts links to resources with
additional information on incident response activities. By moving links from this document to a
website, NIST can update and expand them as needed without having to release a new version
of this publication.
For more information on CSF 2.0 Community Profiles, see the Framework Resource Center.

Audience
The target audience for this publication includes cybersecurity program leadership,
cybersecurity personnel, and others who are responsible for preparing for, detecting,
responding to, or recovering from cybersecurity incidents. This publication is intended for use
by most organizations, regardless of sector, size, or other factors.

Trademark Information
All registered trademarks belong to their respective organizations.




                                                ii
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Patent Disclosure Notice
NOTICE: ITL has requested that holders of patent claims whose use may be required for
compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication disclose such patent claims to
ITL. However, holders of patents are not obligated to respond to ITL calls for patents and ITL has
not undertaken a patent search in order to identify which, if any, patents may apply to this
publication.
As of the date of publication and following call(s) for the identification of patent claims whose
use may be required for compliance with the guidance or requirements of this publication, no
such patent claims have been identified to ITL.
No representation is made or implied by ITL that licenses are not required to avoid patent
infringement in the use of this publication.




                                                iii
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                                             Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                                                  Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Table of Contents
Executive Summary............................................................................................................................1
1. Introduction ...................................................................................................................................2




2. Incident Response as Part of Cybersecurity Risk Management .........................................................4




3. CSF 2.0 Community Profile for Cyber Incident Risk Management ...................................................10



References.......................................................................................................................................36
Appendix A. List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms ...............................................................38
Appendix B. Glossary .......................................................................................................................39
Appendix C. Change Log ...................................................................................................................40


List of Tables
Table 1. Previous incident response life cycle model’s phases and corresponding CSF 2.0 Functions .....6
Table 2. CSF 2.0 Community Profile part 1: Preparation and Lessons Learned ....................................11
Table 3. CSF 2.0 Community Profile part 2: Incident Response ...........................................................23


List of Figures
Fig. 1. Previous incident response life cycle model ..............................................................................4
Fig. 2. Incident response life cycle model based on CSF 2.0 Functions ..................................................5




                                                                        iv
NIST SP 800-61r3                                             Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                  Considerations for Cyber Risk Management



Executive Summary
Incident response is a critical part of cybersecurity risk management and should be integrated
across organizational operations. All six NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 Functions play
vital roles in incident response:
    •   Govern, Identify, and Protect help organizations prevent some incidents, prepare to
        handle incidents that do occur, reduce the impact of those incidents, and improve
        incident response and cybersecurity risk management practices based on lessons
        learned from those incidents.
    •   Detect, Respond, and Recover help organizations discover, manage, prioritize, contain,
        eradicate, and recover from cybersecurity incidents, as well as perform incident
        reporting, notification, and other incident-related communications.
Many individuals, teams, and third parties hold a wide variety of roles and responsibilities
across all of the Functions that support an organization’s incident response. Organizations have
no direct control over the tactics and techniques used by their adversaries, nor are they certain
about the timing of a future incident other than knowing that another incident is inevitable.
However, organizations can use an incident response life cycle framework or model that best
suits them to develop strong cybersecurity risk management practices that reduce their risks to
acceptable levels.
This publication uses the CSF 2.0 Functions, Categories, and Subcategories to organize its
recommendations, considerations, and other information regarding incident response as a CSF
2.0 Community Profile. Doing so provides a common taxonomy that is already widely used for
communicating about incident response and cybersecurity risk management and governance.
This also enables organizations to access a range of online resources mapped to each Function,
Category, and Subcategory through the NIST Cybersecurity and Privacy Reference Tool (CPRT).
These resources include mappings to other incident response and cybersecurity risk
management standards and guidance, as well as sources of implementation guidance that
organizations can choose to utilize as needed.
Organizations should use the incident response life cycle framework or model that suits them
best. The model in this document is based on CSF 2.0 to take advantage of the wealth of
resources available for CSF 2.0 and aid organizations that are already using the CSF. Regardless
of the incident response life cycle framework or model used, every organization should take
incident response into consideration throughout their cybersecurity risk management activities.




                                                1
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                     Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

1. Introduction
Within this document, an event is any observable occurrence that involves computing assets,
including physical and virtual platforms, networks, services, and cloud environments. Examples
of events are user login attempts, the installation of software updates, and an application
responding to a transaction request. Many events focus on security or have security
implications. Adverse events are any events associated with a negative consequence regardless
of cause, including natural disasters, power failures, or cybersecurity attacks. This guide
addresses only adverse cybersecurity events. Additional analysis is often needed to determine
whether adverse cybersecurity events indicate that a cybersecurity incident has occurred.
A cybersecurity incident (or simply incident) is
             …an occurrence that actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful
             authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or availability of information or
             an information system; or constitutes a violation or imminent threat of
             violation of law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use
             policies. [FISMA2014]
Examples of incidents include an attacker:
    •   Employing a botnet to send high volumes of connection requests to an internet-facing
        service, making it unavailable to legitimate service users
    •   Obtaining administrative credentials at a software-as-a-service provider, which puts
        sensitive tenant data entrusted to that provider at risk
    •   Intruding upon an organization’s business network to steal credentials and use them to
        instruct industrial control systems to shut down or destroy critical physical components,
        causing a major service disruption
    •   Deploying ransomware to prevent the use of computer systems and cause multiple data
        breaches by copying files from those systems
    •   Using phishing emails to compromise user accounts and using those accounts to commit
        financial fraud
    •   Identifying a new vulnerability in network management appliances and exploiting the
        vulnerability to gain unauthorized access to network communications
    •   Compromising a vendor’s software, which is subsequently distributed to customers in its
        compromised state
Because of the damage that cybersecurity incidents can inflict on organizations and their
customers, business partners, and others, it is vital to respond quickly and effectively when an
incident occurs. Effective implementation of incident response processes enables systematic
responses to and recovery from incidents by analyzing information and taking appropriate
action. This reduces cybersecurity and enterprise risks by minimizing data loss or theft, the
disruption of services, and the overall impact of incidents. Lessons learned from incident
response activities and root cause analysis help improve cybersecurity risk management and


                                                   2
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

governance efforts and ensure that the organization is better prepared to identify its current
technology assets and cybersecurity risks, protect its assets, and detect, respond to, and
recover from future incidents.

1.1. Purpose and Scope
This publication seeks to help organizations incorporate cybersecurity incident response
recommendations and considerations throughout their cybersecurity risk management
activities. It also provides a common language that all organizations can use to communicate
internally and externally regarding their incident response plans and activities.
The scope of this publication differs significantly from previous versions. Because the details of
how to perform incident response activities change so often and vary so much across
technologies, environments, and organizations, it is no longer feasible to capture and maintain
that information in a single static publication. Instead, this version focuses on improving
cybersecurity risk management for all of the NIST Cybersecurity Framework (CSF) 2.0 Functions
[CSF2.0] to better support an organization’s incident response capabilities.
Readers are encouraged to utilize other NIST resources in conjunction with this document,
including the CSF 2.0 publication and supplemental resources, the Incident Response project
page, and mappings to additional sources of information on implementing incident response
considerations available through the NIST Cybersecurity and Privacy Reference Tool (CPRT). An
example of a CPRT mapping is associating CSF 2.0 outcomes with NIST Special Publication (SP)
800-53 controls that can be implemented to help achieve the outcomes. In this way, CSF 2.0
provides a common language that facilitates access to a large number of other resources.
This publication supersedes SP 800-61r2 (Revision 2), Computer Security Incident Handling
Guide [SP800-61r2].

1.2. Document Structure
The remainder of this document is organized into the following sections and appendices:
    •   Section 2 discusses how incident response has evolved to become a critical part of
        cybersecurity risk management, as well as how the concept of the incident response life
        cycle has changed to reflect that.
    •   Section 3 presents incident response recommendations and considerations for an
        organization’s cybersecurity risk management practices. They are organized and
        documented as a CSF 2.0 Community Profile.
    •   The References section lists references cited throughout this publication.
    •   Appendix A and Appendix B provide an acronyms list and a glossary, respectively.
    •   Appendix C contains a change log of the major changes made since the previous
        revision.




                                                3
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                    Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                         Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

2. Incident Response as Part of Cybersecurity Risk Management
This section explains the fundamental concepts of incident response as an integral part of
cybersecurity risk management. Section 2.1 explores the incident response life cycle and
proposes a new life cycle model based on CSF 2.0 Functions. Section 2.2 discusses incident
response roles and responsibilities both inside and outside an organization. Finally, Section 2.3
briefly examines incident response policies, processes, and procedures.

2.1. Incident Response Life Cycle Model
Fig. 1 depicts the incident response life cycle model illustrated in the previous version of this
publication [SP800-61r2].




                            Fig. 1. Previous incident response life cycle model

At that time, incidents were relatively rare, the scope of most incidents was narrow and well-
defined, and incident response and recovery was usually completed within a day or two. Under
those conditions, it was realistic to treat incident response as a separate set of activities
performed by a separate team of personnel and to depict all incident response activities as part
of a circular life cycle. Formal post-incident activities would identify needed improvements and
feed them into the preparation stage, thus starting the cycle again. Incident response activities
were typically intermittent rather than continuous.
However, the current state of incident response has greatly changed since then. Today,
incidents occur frequently and cause far more damage. Recovering from them often takes
weeks or months due to their breadth, complexity, and dynamic nature. Incident response is
now considered a critical part of cybersecurity risk management that should be integrated
across organizational operations. The lessons learned during incident response should often be
shared as soon as they are identified, not delayed until after recovery concludes. Continuous
improvement is increasingly necessary for all facets of cybersecurity risk management in order
to keep up with modern threats.




                                                    4
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                    Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                         Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Fig. 2 shows a high-level incident response life cycle model based on the six CSF 2.0 Functions,
which organize cybersecurity outcomes at their highest level:
    •   Govern (GV): The organization’s cybersecurity risk management strategy, expectations,
        and policy are established, communicated, and monitored.
    •   Identify (ID): The organization’s current cybersecurity risks are understood.
    •   Protect (PR): Safeguards to manage the organization’s cybersecurity risks are used.
    •   Detect (DE): Possible cybersecurity attacks and compromises are found and analyzed.
    •   Respond (RS): Actions regarding a detected cybersecurity incident are taken.
    •   Recover (RC): Assets and operations affected by a cybersecurity incident are restored.
All six Functions have vital roles in incident response. Govern, Identify, and Protect help
organizations prevent some incidents, prepare to handle incidents that do occur, reduce the
impact of those incidents, and improve incident response and cybersecurity risk management
practices based on lessons learned. Detect, Respond, and Recover help organizations discover,
manage, prioritize, contain, eradicate, and recover from cybersecurity incidents, as well as
perform incident reporting, notification, and other incident-related communications.




                   Fig. 2. Incident response life cycle model based on CSF 2.0 Functions

The bottom level reflects that the preparation activities of Govern, Identify, and Protect are not
part of the incident response itself. Rather, they are much broader cybersecurity risk
management activities that also support incident response. Incident response is shown in the
top level of the figure: Detect, Respond, and Recover. Additionally, the need for continuous
improvement is indicated as the middle level with the Improvement Category (ID.IM) within the
Identify Function and the dashed green lines. Lessons learned from performing all activities in
all Functions are fed into Improvement, and those lessons are analyzed, prioritized, and used to
inform all of the Functions. This reflects that organizations can learn new lessons at all times


                                                    5
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                      Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                           Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

(e.g., detecting the presence of a new threat and characterizing its behavior) and communicate
those lessons to the appropriate personnel so that the organization’s incident response and
other cybersecurity risk management policies, processes, and practices can be adjusted as
needed.
Table 1 maps the previous SP 800-61 incident response life cycle model’s phases to the
corresponding CSF 2.0 Functions used in this document.
       Table 1. Previous incident response life cycle model’s phases and corresponding CSF 2.0 Functions

          Previous Incident Response Life Cycle Model Phase     CSF 2.0 Functions

                                                                Govern

          Preparation                                           Identify (all Categories)

                                                                Protect

                                                                Detect
          Detection & Analysis
                                                                Identify (Improvement Category)

                                                                Respond

          Containment, Eradication & Recovery                   Recover

                                                                Identify (Improvement Category)

          Post-Incident Activity                                Identify (Improvement Category)

Organizations should use the incident response life cycle framework or model that suits them
best. The model in this document is based on CSF 2.0 to take advantage of the wealth of
resources available for CSF 2.0 and aid organizations that are already using the CSF. The
appropriate incident response life cycle framework or model for an organization depends on
many factors; for example, larger and more technology-dependent organizations are likely to
benefit more from using a framework or model emphasizing continuous improvement than
other organizations would. Regardless of the incident response life cycle framework or model
used, every organization should take incident response into consideration throughout their
cybersecurity risk management activities.

2.2. Incident Response Roles and Responsibilities
In the past, incident response activities were performed almost exclusively by incident handlers
from the organization’s own incident response team. Today, while incident handlers are still
critically important, most organizations increasingly recognize that the success of their incident
response efforts depend on the participation of many internal and external parties who hold a
wide variety of roles and responsibilities and may be spread around the world. Roles and
responsibilities will differ for each organization and may also differ within an organization based
on the nature of a particular incident.



                                                      6
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Examples of incident response roles and responsibilities include the following:
    •   Leadership. The organization’s leadership team oversees incident response, allocates
        funding, and may have decision-making authority on high-impact response actions, such
        as shutting down or rebuilding critical services.
    •   Incident handlers. Incident handlers verify that an incident has occurred, collect and
        analyze data and evidence, prioritize incident response activities, and act appropriately
        to limit damage, find root causes, and restore operations. Incident handlers also often
        provide input to others on mitigating cybersecurity issues and improving resiliency. An
        organization’s incident handlers might be:
            o On staff (e.g., an incident response team),
            o On contract (e.g., outsourcing a security operations center [SOC] to a managed
              security services provider [MSSP] or leveraging a cloud service provider’s
              incident response team when an incident occurs within that provider’s cloud),
              and/or
            o Available when needed (e.g., from a parent organization, a cybersecurity services
              provider, a business partner, or a law enforcement agency).
        Many organizations may use more than one of these approaches, such as internally
        performing basic incident response and engaging third-party resources for assistance
        with certain incidents. Larger organizations may have multiple incident response teams,
        with each team responsible for a particular logical or physical segment of the
        organization. When this model is employed, the teams should be part of a single
        coordinated entity (e.g., a federation) to ensure that incident response processes,
        procedures, and training are consistent across the organization and that information is
        shared among teams.
    •   Technology professionals. Cybersecurity, privacy, system, network, cloud, and other
        technology architects, engineers, and administrators, as well as software developers,
        may be involved in incident response and recovery efforts.
    •   Legal. Legal experts can review incident response plans, policies, and procedures to
        ensure compliance with applicable laws and regulations, including the right to privacy.
        Legal experts can also review contracts with technology suppliers and other third parties
        when there are incident response implications. In addition, incident responders can seek
        guidance from their organization’s legal department if a particular incident may have
        legal ramifications, such as the prosecution of a suspect, lawsuits, or situations that
        require a memorandum of understanding (MOU) or other binding agreement.
    •   Public affairs and media relations. Depending on the nature and impact of an incident,
        it may be necessary to inform the media and, by extension, the public. Sometimes, the
        media learns of incidents through alternate sources (i.e., not through public affairs
        personnel). Having a media engagement strategy in place can greatly aid in this
        situation.



                                                 7
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

    •   Human resources. Certain human resources practices should consider cybersecurity risk
        management, including pre-employment screening and employee onboarding,
        offboarding, and position changes. Human resources may also be involved if an
        employee is suspected of intentionally causing an incident.
    •   Physical security and facilities management. Some computer security incidents occur
        through physical security breaches or involve coordinated logical and physical attacks.
        The incident response team may also need access to facilities during incident handling
        (e.g., to access a compromised workstation in a locked office).
    •   Asset owners. Asset owners (e.g., system owners, data owners, and business process
        owners) may have valuable insights on response and recovery priorities for their
        affected assets. They also need to be kept up to date on the status of response and
        recovery efforts.
Third parties may be under contract with an organization to help perform incident response
activities. Some third parties may fill a primary role (e.g., an MSSP performing incident
detection, response, and recovery activities), while other parties (e.g., cloud service providers
[CSPs] and internet service providers [ISPs]) may be involved in certain incident response
activities for particular types of incidents. This is a shared responsibility model in which the
organization transfers some of its responsibilities to a provider. These responsibilities should be
clearly defined in a contract, and the incident response team should be aware of the division of
responsibilities, including information flows, coordination, and authority to act on behalf of the
organization. This also includes restrictions on what the service provider can do, such as sharing
sanitized incident information with other customers or making and implementing operational
decisions (e.g., immediately deactivating certain services to contain an incident).
A service provider may detect malicious activity sooner than individual organizations would
because it can correlate events across its customers. In some situations, a service provider
might be able to use knowledge of an incident with one customer to proactively prevent similar
incidents with its other customers. Service providers often have privileged access to
organizational systems and may also have access to sensitive organizational data. Accordingly,
the risk of malicious insiders or the service provider being compromised should be considered
and addressed. Non-disclosure agreements (NDAs) and contracting clauses are options for
deterring the unauthorized disclosure of sensitive data.

2.3. Incident Response Policies, Processes, and Procedures
Organizations should have policies that govern their cybersecurity incident response. While a
policy is highly individualized to the organization, most incident response policies include the
same key elements:
    •   Statement of management commitment
    •   Purpose and objectives of the policy
    •   Scope of the policy (i.e., to whom and what it applies and under what circumstances)



                                                 8
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                     Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

    •   Definition of events, cybersecurity incidents, investigations, and related terms
    •   Roles, responsibilities, and authorities, such as which roles have the authority to
        confiscate, disconnect, or shut down technology assets
    •   Guidelines for prioritizing incidents, estimating their severity, initiating recovery
        processes, maintaining or restoring operations, and other key actions
    •   Performance measures
Processes and procedures should be based on the incident response policy and plan.
Documented procedures should explain how technical processes and other operating
procedures should be performed. Procedures can be tested or exercised periodically to verify
their accuracy and can be used to help train new personnel. While it is impossible to have
detailed procedures for every possible situation, organizations should consider documenting
procedures for responding to the most common types of incidents and threats. Organizations
should also develop and maintain procedures for particularly important processes that may be
urgently needed during emergency situations, such as redeploying the organization’s primary
authentication platform.
Many organizations choose to create playbooks as part of documenting their procedures.
Playbooks provide actionable steps or tasks for people to perform during various scenarios or
situations. Formatting procedures within a playbook instead of another format can improve
their usability. See the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) Cybersecurity
Incident & Vulnerability Response Playbooks [CISA-PB] for incident response playbook
examples.




                                                  9
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

3. CSF 2.0 Community Profile for Cyber Incident Risk Management
A CSF Community Profile is a baseline of CSF outcomes that is created and published to address
shared interests and goals for reducing cybersecurity risk among a number of organizations. A
Community Profile is typically developed for a particular sector, subsector, technology, threat
type, or other use case [CSF2.0].
This section defines NIST’s CSF 2.0 Community Profile for cyber incident risk management. It
uses the CSF Core as the basis for highlighting and prioritizing cybersecurity outcomes that are
important for incident response, makes recommendations, and provides other supporting
information for certain CSF outcomes within the context of incident response [CSWP32]. The
Community Profile is split into two tables: Table 2 covers Preparation (Govern, Identify, and
Protect) and Lessons Learned (Identify-Improvement), while Table 3 covers Incident Response
(Detect, Respond, and Recover).
Each CSF 2.0 Function, Category, and Subcategory has its own row in one of the two tables.
Each row’s relative priority within the context of incident response is indicated by one of the
following:
    •   High: Functions as a core incident response activity for most organizations
    •   Medium: Directly supports incident response activities for most organizations
    •   Low: Indirectly supports incident response activities for most organizations
These priorities are intended as a starting point for organizations, who are encouraged to
customize this Community Profile to reflect their own priorities and needs.
The last column may contain one or more items that recommend what to do or describe
additional considerations or supporting information for some rows. Each item in that column
has an ID starting with one of the following:
    •   “R” (recommendation: something the organization should do)
    •   “C” (consideration: something the organization should consider doing)
    •   “N” (note: additional information besides recommendations and considerations)
An R, C, or N designation and its number can be appended to the row’s CSF ID to create an
identifier that is unique within the Community Profile (e.g., “GV.OC-03.R1” is recommendation
1 for CSF Subcategory GV.OC-03).
Recommendations, considerations, and notes made at a higher level of the CSF (Function or
Category) also apply to their component elements (Categories or Subcategories).
The recommendations, considerations, and notes supplement what the CSF 2.0 already
provides through its documents and online resources. The recommendations, considerations,
and notes are not comprehensive, and not all of them will be applicable to every organization.
Technologies mentioned in recommendations, considerations, and notes are examples as of
this writing and may become outdated.




                                                10
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                         Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Some recommendations, considerations, and notes use terms that are not defined in this
publication (e.g., “data breach”). Organizations that adopt the Community Profile should define
these terms in the context of their own environments, use cases, and applicable laws and
regulations. Readers may also choose to consult NIST’s glossary, which contains an aggregation
of terms and definitions from numerous NIST standards, guidelines, and other publications.
The Community Profile is intended for use by most organizations, regardless of sector, size, or
other factors. Additional versions of this Community Profile could be developed for narrower
audiences, such as federal agencies, small businesses, or educational institutions. For more
information on CSF 2.0 Community Profiles, see the Framework Resource Center.

3.1. Preparation and Lessons Learned
Table 2 contains the first part of the Community Profile: Preparation and Lessons Learned,
which both support the Incident Response part of the Community Profile defined in Table 3.
               Note: Most of the CSF elements in this part of the Profile are not
               specific to executing incident response activities, so they have lower
               priorities with respect to incident response and do not contain
               recommendations or considerations. This does not imply that they are
               unnecessary for organizations to achieve, but rather that they are
               outside of the direct scope of responding to incidents.
                   Table 2. CSF 2.0 Community Profile part 1: Preparation and Lessons Learned

 CSF Element           CSF Element Description             Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 GV (Govern)           The organization’s cybersecurity    Low
                       risk management strategy,
                       expectations, and policy are
                       established, communicated, and
                       monitored
 GV.OC                 The circumstances — mission,        Low
 (Organizational       stakeholder expectations,
 Context)              dependencies, and legal,
                       regulatory, and contractual
                       requirements — surrounding
                       the organization’s cybersecurity
                       risk management decisions are
                       understood
 GV.OC-01              The organizational mission is       Low
                       understood and informs
                       cybersecurity risk management
 GV.OC-02              Internal and external               Low
                       stakeholders are understood,
                       and their needs and
                       expectations regarding
                       cybersecurity risk management
                       are understood and considered
 GV.OC-03              Legal, regulatory, and              Medium     R1: Cybersecurity requirements should
                       contractual requirements                       include all requirements related to incident



                                                          11
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                       Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                            Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description               Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                   regarding cybersecurity —                        notifications, data breach reporting, and
                   including privacy and civil                      other aspects of incident response.
                   liberties obligations — are
                   understood and managed
 GV.OC-04          Critical objectives, capabilities,    Medium     N1: Understanding critical external
                   and services that external                       dependencies on the organization’s
                   stakeholders depend on or                        operations can aid in prioritizing response
                   expect from the organization                     and recovery efforts.
                   are understood and
                   communicated
 GV.OC-05          Outcomes, capabilities, and           Medium     N1: Understanding critical dependencies on
                   services that the organization                   external resources (e.g., cloud-based
                   depends on are understood and                    hosting providers and managed service
                   communicated                                     providers) can aid in prioritizing response
                                                                    and recovery efforts.
 GV.RM (Risk       The organization’s priorities,        Low
 Management        constraints, risk tolerance and
 Strategy)         appetite statements, and
                   assumptions are established,
                   communicated, and used to
                   support operational risk
                   decisions
 GV.RM-01          Risk management objectives are        Low
                   established and agreed to by
                   organizational stakeholders
 GV.RM-02          Risk appetite and risk tolerance      Low
                   statements are established,
                   communicated, and maintained
 GV.RM-03          Cybersecurity risk management         Medium     R1: Have processes in place so that
                   activities and outcomes are                      incident-related decision-making will be
                   included in enterprise risk                      informed by other types of risks that the
                   management processes                             organization faces (e.g., privacy,
                                                                    operational, safety, reputational, AI) and
                                                                    not just cybersecurity risks in isolation.
 GV.RM-04          Strategic direction that              Low
                   describes appropriate risk
                   response options is established
                   and communicated
 GV.RM-05          Lines of communication across         Low
                   the organization are established
                   for cybersecurity risks, including
                   risks from suppliers and other
                   third parties
 GV.RM-06          A standardized method for             Medium     N1: Having a standardized method for
                   calculating, documenting,                        calculating cybersecurity risks can aid in
                   categorizing, and prioritizing                   prioritizing response and recovery efforts
                   cybersecurity risks is established               and in comparing the estimated and actual
                   and communicated                                 impacts of incidents.
                                                                    N2: Such a method can also be used to
                                                                    establish criteria and inform decision




                                                        12
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                         Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element         CSF Element Description               Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                      making on when to escalate or elevate
                                                                      incident response activities.
 GV.RM-07            Strategic opportunities (i.e.,        Low
                     positive risks) are characterized
                     and are included in
                     organizational cybersecurity risk
                     discussions
 GV.RR (Roles,       Cybersecurity roles,                  Medium     R1: Cybersecurity roles, responsibilities,
 Responsibilities,   responsibilities, and authorities                and authorities should include incident
 and Authorities)    to foster accountability,                        response.
                     performance assessment, and
                     continuous improvement are
                     established and communicated
 GV.RR-01            Organizational leadership is          Medium     R1: See the recommendation for GV.RR.
                     responsible and accountable for
                     cybersecurity risk and fosters a
                     culture that is risk-aware,
                     ethical, and continually
                     improving
 GV.RR-02            Roles, responsibilities, and          Medium     N1: Roles and responsibilities that involve
                     authorities related to                           cybersecurity incident response typically
                     cybersecurity risk management                    exist throughout an organization and often
                     are established, communicated,                   include third parties (e.g., those under
                     understood, and enforced                         contract) to help perform incident response
                                                                      activities for the organization.
                                                                      R1: All roles and responsibilities involving
                                                                      cybersecurity incident response should be
                                                                      documented in an organization’s policies.
                                                                      R2: All appropriate individuals or parties
                                                                      should be designated the authority
                                                                      necessary to fulfill their incident response-
                                                                      related responsibilities.
                                                                      R3: See the recommendation for GV.RR.
 GV.RR-03            Adequate resources are                Low
                     allocated commensurate with
                     the cybersecurity risk strategy,
                     roles, responsibilities, and
                     policies
 GV.RR-04            Cybersecurity is included in          Low
                     human resources practices
 GV.PO (Policy)      Organizational cybersecurity          High       R1: Cybersecurity policies should include an
                     policy is established,                           incident response policy.
                     communicated, and enforced
 GV.PO-01            Policy for managing                   Low
                     cybersecurity risks is established
                     based on organizational
                     context, cybersecurity strategy,
                     and priorities and is
                     communicated and enforced
 GV.PO-02            Policy for managing                   Low
                     cybersecurity risks is reviewed,



                                                          13
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                        Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                             Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element         CSF Element Description              Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                     updated, communicated, and
                     enforced to reflect changes in
                     requirements, threats,
                     technology, and organizational
                     mission
 GV.OV (Oversight)   Results of organization-wide         Low
                     cybersecurity risk management
                     activities and performance are
                     used to inform, improve, and
                     adjust the risk management
                     strategy
 GV.OV-01            Cybersecurity risk management        Medium     R1: Take past cybersecurity incidents into
                     strategy outcomes are reviewed                  account when adjusting the organization’s
                     to inform and adjust strategy                   cybersecurity risk management strategy
                     and direction                                   and direction.
 GV.OV-02            The cybersecurity risk               Medium     R1: Take risks from past cybersecurity
                     management strategy is                          incidents into account when reviewing the
                     reviewed and adjusted to                        organization’s cybersecurity risk
                     ensure coverage of                              management strategy.
                     organizational requirements
                     and risks
 GV.OV-03            Organizational cybersecurity         Low
                     risk management performance
                     is evaluated and reviewed for
                     adjustments needed
 GV.SC               Cyber supply chain risk              Low
 (Cybersecurity      management processes are
 Supply Chain Risk   identified, established,
 Management)         managed, monitored, and
                     improved by organizational
                     stakeholders
 GV.SC-01            A cybersecurity supply chain risk    Low
                     management program, strategy,
                     objectives, policies, and
                     processes are established and
                     agreed to by organizational
                     stakeholders
 GV.SC-02            Cybersecurity roles and              Low        N1: See GV.RR-02 for additional
                     responsibilities for suppliers,                 information on cybersecurity incident
                     customers, and partners are                     response-related roles and responsibilities
                     established, communicated, and                  for third parties.
                     coordinated internally and
                     externally
 GV.SC-03            Cybersecurity supply chain risk      Low
                     management is integrated into
                     cybersecurity and enterprise
                     risk management, risk
                     assessment, and improvement
                     processes
 GV.SC-04            Suppliers are known and              Low
                     prioritized by criticality



                                                         14
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                     Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                          Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description             Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 GV.SC-05          Requirements to address             Medium     R1: Cybersecurity supply chain risk
                   cybersecurity risks in supply                  management requirements should include
                   chains are established,                        cybersecurity performance and
                   prioritized, and integrated into               vulnerability, threat, and incident disclosure
                   contracts and other types of                   and information sharing.
                   agreements with suppliers and
                   other relevant third parties
 GV.SC-06          Planning and due diligence are      Low
                   performed to reduce risks
                   before entering into formal
                   supplier or other third-party
                   relationships
 GV.SC-07          The risks posed by a supplier,      Low
                   their products and services, and
                   other third parties are
                   understood, recorded,
                   prioritized, assessed, responded
                   to, and monitored over the
                   course of the relationship
 GV.SC-08          Relevant suppliers and other        Medium     N1: The GV.SC-08 Subcategory is specific to
                   third parties are included in                  incident planning, response, and recovery.
                   incident planning, response,                   N2: See ID.IM-02 for more information on
                   and recovery activities                        tests and exercises.
 GV.SC-09          Supply chain security practices     Low
                   are integrated into
                   cybersecurity and enterprise
                   risk management programs, and
                   their performance is monitored
                   throughout the technology
                   product and service life cycle
 GV.SC-10          Cybersecurity supply chain risk     Low
                   management plans include
                   provisions for activities that
                   occur after the conclusion of a
                   partnership or service
                   agreement
 ID (Identify)     The organization’s current          Medium     N1: All Identify Categories are beneficial for
                   cybersecurity risks are                        preventing, responding to, and recovering
                   understood                                     from incidents.
 ID.AM (Asset      Assets (e.g., data, hardware,       Medium     N1: All asset management information can
 Management)       software, systems, facilities,                 be helpful to incident responders in many
                   services, people) that enable                  ways, such as understanding the impact of
                   the organization to achieve                    an incident, identifying other assets that
                   business purposes are identified               may be targeted, and prioritizing response
                   and managed consistent with                    and recovery efforts.
                   their relative importance to
                   organizational objectives and
                   the organization’s risk strategy
 ID.AM-01          Inventories of hardware             Medium     R1: Make current and automatically
                   managed by the organization                    updated inventories of the internal and
                   are maintained                                 external hardware used by the organization



                                                      15
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                     Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                          Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description             Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                  available for use in finding and addressing
                                                                  vulnerabilities, monitoring operations and
                                                                  usage to detect adverse cybersecurity
                                                                  events, and identifying “shadow IT” usage.
 ID.AM-02          Inventories of software,            Medium     R1: Make current and automatically
                   services, and systems managed                  updated inventories of the internal and
                   by the organization are                        external software, services, and systems
                   maintained                                     used by the organization available for use in
                                                                  finding and addressing vulnerabilities,
                                                                  monitoring operations and usage to detect
                                                                  adverse cybersecurity events, and
                                                                  identifying “shadow IT” usage.
 ID.AM-03          Representations of the              Medium     N1: Maintaining network data flow
                   organization’s authorized                      representations can improve the accuracy
                   network communication and                      of detecting malicious data flows and
                   internal and external network                  communication.
                   data flows are maintained                      C1: Consider leveraging automation and
                                                                  zero trust architectures to automatically
                                                                  create and maintain network data flow
                                                                  representations.
 ID.AM-04          Inventories of services provided    Medium     R1: Current and automatically updated
                   by suppliers are maintained                    inventories of the services provided by the
                                                                  organization’s suppliers should be available
                                                                  for use in finding and addressing
                                                                  vulnerabilities, monitoring operations and
                                                                  usage to detect adverse cybersecurity
                                                                  events, and identifying “shadow IT” usage.
 ID.AM-05          Assets are prioritized based on     Medium     R1: Prioritizing the organization’s assets —
                   classification, criticality,                   including hardware, software, services,
                   resources, and impact on the                   systems, and data — and being aware of
                   mission                                        the dependencies between those and other
                                                                  assets should help indicate where the
                                                                  organization should focus its resources in
                                                                  terms of protection, detection, response,
                                                                  and recovery.
 ID.AM-07          Inventories of data and             Medium     R1: Having data inventories that include
                   corresponding metadata for                     data classifications, owners, and logical and
                   designated data types are                      physical locations should provide valuable
                   maintained                                     information on what data may have been
                                                                  involved in an incident.
 ID.AM-08          Systems, hardware, software,        Medium     R1: Managing hardware, software, services,
                   services, and data are managed                 and systems throughout their life cycles
                   throughout their life cycles                   should take cybersecurity into
                                                                  consideration, such as configuring them
                                                                  securely, reducing attack surfaces, and
                                                                  updating inventory information as assets
                                                                  are transferred or relocated.
 ID.RA (Risk       The cybersecurity risk to the       Medium     N1: Risk assessment practices are critical
 Assessment)       organization, assets, and                      for reducing the number of incidents that
                   individuals is understood by the               occur and the impacts they cause. Risk
                   organization                                   assessment is a vast topic that is outside of



                                                      16
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                     Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                          Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description             Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                  the scope of this Profile other than to
                                                                  summarize its importance for incident
                                                                  response.
                                                                  N2: See [SP800-37r2] for more information
                                                                  on cybersecurity risk.
                                                                  N3: See [SP800-30r1] for more information
                                                                  on cybersecurity risk assessment.
 ID.RA-01          Vulnerabilities in assets are       Medium     R1: Understand current known
                   identified, validated, and                     cybersecurity vulnerabilities to make
                   recorded                                       informed decisions when assessing risks.
                                                                  This should include all types of known
                                                                  cybersecurity vulnerabilities, such as flaws
                                                                  in software (including firmware and
                                                                  software-based services) developed by the
                                                                  organization and third parties, software
                                                                  misconfigurations, network and system
                                                                  design and implementation weaknesses,
                                                                  physical vulnerabilities and resilience issues
                                                                  in facilities that house computing assets,
                                                                  and integrity violations in hardware and
                                                                  software (e.g., counterfeit, evidence of
                                                                  tampering).
                                                                  N1: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-02          Cyber threat intelligence is        High       N1: Cyber threat intelligence (CTI) is threat
                   received from information                      information that has been aggregated,
                   sharing forums and sources                     transformed, analyzed, interpreted, or
                                                                  enriched to provide the necessary context
                                                                  for decision-making processes.
                                                                  Organizations can receive CTI from
                                                                  automated CTI feeds, information sharing
                                                                  forums, and other sources.
                                                                  N2: CTI is useful for incident response and
                                                                  recovery in several ways, including
                                                                  obtaining information on new threats,
                                                                  improving the accuracy of cybersecurity
                                                                  technologies with incident detection or
                                                                  response capabilities, and understanding
                                                                  the tactics, techniques, and procedures
                                                                  (TTPs) used by attackers. TTPs describe the
                                                                  behavior of an actor. Information on
                                                                  threats and their TTPs is widely available
                                                                  through repositories and knowledge bases.
                                                                  N3: [SP800-150] provides guidelines on
                                                                  consuming, using, and storing CTIs, as well
                                                                  as establishing CTI relationships.
                                                                  N4: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-03          Internal and external threats to    Medium     R1: Identify internal and external threats
                   the organization are identified                during routine operations and from CTI.
                   and recorded                                   N1: Other possible methods that
                                                                  organizations could consider for identifying




                                                      17
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                       Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                            Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description               Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                    threats include threat hunting and the use
                                                                    of deception technologies.
                                                                    N2: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-04          Potential impacts and                 Medium     N1: Recording the potential impacts and
                   likelihoods of threats exploiting                likelihoods of threats exploiting
                   vulnerabilities are identified and               vulnerabilities is necessary for determining
                   recorded                                         risk.
                                                                    N2: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-05          Threats, vulnerabilities,             High       R1: Organizations with mechanisms in place
                   likelihoods, and impacts are                     for estimating cybersecurity risk as part of
                   used to understand inherent                      their cybersecurity risk management
                   risk and inform risk response                    programs should use those mechanisms for
                   prioritization                                   incident response purposes.
                                                                    C1: Consider using threat modeling and
                                                                    other methods to inform the understanding
                                                                    of attack vectors, attack surfaces, and
                                                                    lateral paths through organizational assets,
                                                                    among other factors that contribute to risk.
                                                                    N1: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-06          Risk responses are chosen,            High       N1: Risk responses are needed to prevent
                   prioritized, planned, tracked,                   future incidents from occurring and existing
                   and communicated                                 incidents from reoccurring.
                                                                    R1: The organization’s policies, processes,
                                                                    and procedures should provide guidance
                                                                    (e.g., criteria) for making decisions
                                                                    regarding appropriate risk responses in
                                                                    various situations.
                                                                    N2: The four types of risk responses are 1)
                                                                    Accept (accept the risk as is), 2) Mitigate
                                                                    (reduce the risk by eliminating the
                                                                    vulnerabilities and/or deploying additional
                                                                    security controls to reduce vulnerability
                                                                    exploitation), 3) Transfer (reduce the risk by
                                                                    sharing some of the consequences with
                                                                    another party), and 4) Avoid (ensure that
                                                                    the risk does not occur by eliminating the
                                                                    attack surface).
                                                                    N3: See [IR8286] for more information on
                                                                    risk responses.
                                                                    N4: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-07          Changes and exceptions are            Medium     N1: See the notes for ID.RA.
                   managed, assessed for risk
                   impact, recorded, and tracked
 ID.RA-08          Processes for receiving,              Medium     N1: A vulnerability disclosure is when a
                   analyzing, and responding to                     third party reports a suspected vulnerability
                   vulnerability disclosures are                    in one of the organization’s systems to the
                   established                                      organization.
                                                                    N2: See [SP800-216] for more information
                                                                    on vulnerability disclosure.
                                                                    N3: See Section 4.5.2 of [SP800-150] for
                                                                    guidance on using data formats that may



                                                        18
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                      Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                           Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description              Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                   assist with maintaining cross-references
                                                                   between asset inventories and sources of
                                                                   vulnerability disclosures.
                                                                   N4: See the notes for ID.RA.
 ID.RA-09          The authenticity and integrity of    Medium     N1: See the notes for ID.RA.
                   hardware and software are
                   assessed prior to acquisition
                   and use
 ID.RA-10          Critical suppliers are assessed      Low        N1: See the notes for ID.RA.
                   prior to acquisition
 ID.IM             Improvements to organizational       Medium     N1: See the note for ID.
 (Improvement)     cybersecurity risk management
                   processes, procedures, and
                   activities are identified across
                   all CSF Functions
 ID.IM-01          Improvements are identified          Medium     R1: Periodically evaluate incident response
                   from evaluations                                program performance to identify problems
                                                                   and deficiencies that should be corrected.
                                                                   N1: Possible evaluation forms include self-
                                                                   assessments, third-party assessments, and
                                                                   independent audits.
 ID.IM-02          Improvements are identified          High       N1: Incident response exercises and tests
                   from security tests and                         may provide helpful information for
                   exercises, including those done                 program evaluation and prepare staff and
                   in coordination with suppliers                  involved third parties (e.g., critical service
                   and relevant third parties                      providers and product suppliers) for future
                                                                   incident response activities.
                                                                   N2: See [SP800-84] for more information on
                                                                   simulations, tabletop discussions, and other
                                                                   forms of exercises.
 ID.IM-03          Improvements are identified          High       N1: The execution of operational processes,
                   from the execution of                           procedures, and activities includes all
                   operational processes,                          incident response and recovery efforts.
                   procedures, and activities                      N2: Improvements that affect incident
                                                                   response can be made to the incident
                                                                   response program itself (e.g., plan, policy,
                                                                   processes, procedures) or to other aspects
                                                                   of the organization’s cybersecurity risk
                                                                   management activities (e.g., identifying
                                                                   TTPs that are not currently being blocked
                                                                   by safeguards or flagged by detection
                                                                   technologies).
                                                                   N3: Improvements are often identified
                                                                   when creating follow-up reports for
                                                                   incidents or holding “lessons learned”
                                                                   meetings when an incident’s recovery
                                                                   efforts are concluding, especially if the
                                                                   incident was major. This provides an
                                                                   opportunity to review what happened,
                                                                   what actions were taken, and how effective
                                                                   those actions were, as well as hear from all



                                                       19
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                   Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                        Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description           Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                parties involved in the incident. Such a
                                                                meeting can help identify and prioritize
                                                                potential improvements to the
                                                                organization’s incident response program
                                                                and cybersecurity risk management efforts.
 ID.IM-04          Incident response plans and       High       N1: Several types of cybersecurity plans are
                   other cybersecurity plans that               relevant to incident response, including 1)
                   affect operations are                        incident response plans, which provide the
                   established, communicated,                   roadmap for implementing the incident
                   maintained, and improved                     response capability; 2) vulnerability
                                                                management plans, which help identify and
                                                                assess all types of vulnerabilities and
                                                                prioritize, test, and implement risk
                                                                responses; and 3) business continuity plans.
                                                                R1: Synchronize business continuity plans
                                                                with incident response plans since incidents
                                                                can undermine business resilience.
                                                                R2: Review and update all cybersecurity
                                                                plans periodically or when a need for
                                                                significant improvements is identified.
                                                                R3: Base each cybersecurity plan on the
                                                                organization’s unique requirements,
                                                                mission, size, structure, and functions.
                                                                R4: Each cybersecurity plan should identify
                                                                the resources and management support
                                                                needed to carry it out successfully.
                                                                N2: Business continuity planning
                                                                professionals who are made aware of
                                                                cybersecurity incidents and their impacts
                                                                can fine-tune business impact assessments,
                                                                risk assessments, and continuity of
                                                                operations plans. Further, because business
                                                                continuity planners have extensive
                                                                expertise in minimizing operational
                                                                disruption during severe circumstances,
                                                                they may be valuable in planning responses
                                                                to specific incident types, such as denial-of-
                                                                service (DoS) conditions.
 PR (Protect)      Safeguards to manage the          Medium     N1: Lowering the number of incidents
                   organization’s cybersecurity                 shortens operational disruptions, allows
                   risks are used                               response teams to focus on high-impact
                                                                situations, and reduces the impact of
                                                                incidents that do occur (e.g., by making it
                                                                harder for attackers to move laterally
                                                                throughout an environment and, thus,
                                                                slowing them down).
                                                                N2: Understanding the protection
                                                                mechanisms in place can help personnel
                                                                deploy methods to detect protection
                                                                failures and bypasses.




                                                    20
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                       Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                            Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element        CSF Element Description              Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                    N3: It is outside of the scope of this Profile
                                                                    to provide recommendations and
                                                                    considerations on protecting assets, other
                                                                    than a few notes of practices that
                                                                    specifically benefit incident response
                                                                    activities.
 PR.AA (Identity    Access to physical and logical       Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
 Management,        assets is limited to authorized
 Authentication,    users, services, and hardware
 and Access         and managed commensurate
 Control)           with the assessed risk of
                    unauthorized access
 PR.AA-01           Identities and credentials for       Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    authorized users, services, and
                    hardware are managed by the
                    organization
 PR.AA-02           Identities are proofed and           Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    bound to credentials based on
                    the context of interactions
 PR.AA-03           Users, services, and hardware        Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    are authenticated
 PR.AA-04           Identity assertions are              Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    protected, conveyed, and
                    verified
 PR.AA-05           Access permissions,                  Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    entitlements, and
                    authorizations are defined in a
                    policy, managed, enforced, and
                    reviewed, and incorporate the
                    principles of least privilege and
                    separation of duties
 PR.AA-06           Physical access to assets is         Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    managed, monitored, and
                    enforced commensurate with
                    risk
 PR.AT (Awareness   The organization’s personnel         Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
 and Training)      are provided with cybersecurity
                    awareness and training so that
                    they can perform their
                    cybersecurity-related tasks
 PR.AT-01           Personnel are provided with          Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                    awareness and training so that
                    they possess the knowledge and
                    skills to perform general tasks
                    with cybersecurity risks in mind
 PR.AT-02           Individuals in specialized roles     Medium     R1: Role-based training should include
                    are provided with awareness                     incident-related responsibilities.
                    and training so that they                       N1: See the notes for PR.
                    possess the knowledge and
                    skills to perform relevant tasks
                    with cybersecurity risks in mind



                                                        21
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                      Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                           Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description              Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 PR.DS (Data       Data are managed consistent          Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
 Security)         with the organization’s risk
                   strategy to protect the
                   confidentiality, integrity, and
                   availability of information
 PR.DS-01          The confidentiality, integrity,      Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   and availability of data-at-rest
                   are protected
 PR.DS-02          The confidentiality, integrity,      Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   and availability of data-in-
                   transit are protected
 PR.DS-10          The confidentiality, integrity,      Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   and availability of data-in-use
                   are protected
 PR.DS-11          Backups of data are created,         High       N1: Backups can be particularly important
                   protected, maintained, and                      for recovery purposes when data integrity
                   tested                                          or availability is affected.
                                                                   N1: See the notes for PR.
 PR.PS (Platform   The hardware, software (e.g.,        Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
 Security)         firmware, operating systems,
                   applications), and services of
                   physical and virtual platforms
                   are managed consistent with
                   the organization’s risk strategy
                   to protect their confidentiality,
                   integrity, and availability
 PR.PS-01          Configuration management             Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   practices are established and
                   applied
 PR.PS-02          Software is maintained,              Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   replaced, and removed
                   commensurate with risk
 PR.PS-03          Hardware is maintained,              Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   replaced, and removed
                   commensurate with risk
 PR.PS-04          Log records are generated and        Medium     N1: Logs are particularly important for
                   made available for continuous                   recording and preserving information that
                   monitoring                                      is vital to incident detection, response, and
                                                                   recovery activities.
                                                                   N2: For more information on log
                                                                   management, see [SP800-92r1].
                                                                   N3: See the notes for PR.
 PR.PS-05          Installation and execution of        Medium     N1: See the notes for PR.
                   unauthorized software are
                   prevented
 PR.PS-06          Secure software development          Medium     N1: For more information on secure
                   practices are integrated, and                   software development practices, including
                   their performance is monitored                  responding to vulnerabilities or incidents
                   throughout the software                         that involve released software, see [SP800-
                   development life cycle                          218].
                                                                   N2: See the notes for PR.



                                                       22
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element           CSF Element Description              Priority       Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 PR.IR (Technology     Security architectures are           Medium         N1: See the notes for PR.
 Infrastructure        managed with the
 Resilience)           organization’s risk strategy to
                       protect asset confidentiality,
                       integrity, and availability, and
                       organizational resilience
 PR.IR-01              Networks and environments are        Medium         N1: See the notes for PR.
                       protected from unauthorized
                       logical access and usage
 PR.IR-02              The organization’s technology        Medium         N1: See the notes for PR.
                       assets are protected from
                       environmental threats
 PR.IR-03              Mechanisms are implemented           Medium         N1: See the notes for PR.
                       to achieve resilience
                       requirements in normal and
                       adverse situations
 PR.IR-04              Adequate resource capacity to        Medium         N1: See the notes for PR.
                       ensure availability is maintained


3.2. Incident Response
Table 3 contains the second part of the Community Profile: Incident Response.
               Note: All of the CSF elements in this part of the Profile are specific to
               responding to incidents, so they have higher priorities with respect to
               incident response than those in the first part. Accordingly, all CSF
               elements in this part have recommendations or considerations.
                          Table 3. CSF 2.0 Community Profile part 2: Incident Response

 CSF Element          CSF Element Description                   Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 DE (Detect)          Possible cybersecurity attacks            High       N1: The Detect Function encompasses all of
                      and compromises are found and                        the monitoring and analysis activities
                      analyzed                                             performed to find and characterize
                                                                           potentially adverse events and, in turn, find
                                                                           cybersecurity incidents.
 DE.CM                Assets are monitored to find              High       R1: Continuous monitoring for
 (Continuous          anomalies, indicators of                             unauthorized activity, deviations from
 Monitoring)          compromise, and other                                expected activity, and changes in security
                      potentially adverse events                           posture should involve the following types
                                                                           of assets at all times: networks and
                                                                           network services; computing hardware and
                                                                           software, runtime environments, and their
                                                                           data; the physical environment; personnel
                                                                           activity and technology usage; and external
                                                                           service provider activities.
                                                                           C1: Consider using cyber threat information
                                                                           with continuous monitoring to help identify
                                                                           potentially malicious activities that may
                                                                           have otherwise been considered benign.



                                                           23
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                         Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                  Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                       R2: Tune the continuous monitoring
                                                                       technologies to reduce false positives and
                                                                       false negatives to acceptable levels.
 DE.CM-01          Networks and network services            High       R1: Monitoring should include wired and
                   are monitored to find potentially                   wireless networks, network
                   adverse events                                      communications and flows, network
                                                                       services (e.g., DNS and BGP), and the
                                                                       presence of unauthorized or rogue
                                                                       networks within facilities.
 DE.CM-02          The physical environment is              High       R1: Monitoring the physical environment
                   monitored to find potentially                       should include all successful and failed
                   adverse events                                      access attempts into all controlled areas,
                                                                       the movement of people and equipment
                                                                       into and out of secure areas of facilities,
                                                                       and signs of tampering with physical access
                                                                       controls.
 DE.CM-03          Personnel activity and                   High       R1: Monitoring personnel activity and
                   technology usage are monitored                      technology usage should include
                   to find potentially adverse                         anomalous user activity or unusual
                   events                                              patterns of activity, authentication and
                                                                       logical access attempts, and the use of
                                                                       deception technology.
 DE.CM-06          External service provider                High       R1: Monitoring external service provider
                   activities and services are                         activities and services should include
                   monitored to find potentially                       remote and on-site administration and
                   adverse events                                      maintenance activities that providers
                                                                       perform on organizational systems and
                                                                       deviations from expected behavior by
                                                                       cloud-based services, internet service
                                                                       providers, and other service providers.
 DE.CM-09          Computing hardware and                   High       R1: Monitor email, web, file sharing,
                   software, runtime environments,                     collaboration services, and other common
                   and their data are monitored to                     attack vectors to detect malware, phishing,
                   find potentially adverse events                     data leaks, exfiltration, and other adverse
                                                                       events.
                                                                       R2: Monitor authentication attempts to
                                                                       identify attacks against credentials and
                                                                       unauthorized credential use.
                                                                       R3: Monitor software and hardware
                                                                       configurations for deviations from security
                                                                       baselines.
                                                                       R4: Monitor hardware and software,
                                                                       including cybersecurity protection
                                                                       mechanisms, for signs of tampering, failure,
                                                                       or compromise.
                                                                       R5: Monitor endpoints for cyber health
                                                                       issues (e.g., missing patches, malware
                                                                       infections, or unauthorized software), and
                                                                       redirect endpoints with issues to a
                                                                       remediation environment before access is
                                                                       authorized.



                                                       24
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                       Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                            Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 DE.AE (Adverse    Anomalies, indicators of               High       N1: Adverse event analysis involves
 Event Analysis)   compromise, and other                             studying the data on potentially adverse
                   potentially adverse events are                    events collected by continuous monitoring
                   analyzed to characterize the                      to find possible attacks and compromises
                   events and detect cybersecurity                   and declaring when an incident has
                   incidents                                         occurred so as to initiate incident response
                                                                     activities.
                                                                     R1: The volume of potentially adverse
                                                                     events to be analyzed is generally quite
                                                                     high, so organizations should rely on
                                                                     technical solutions that filter large event
                                                                     datasets down to a subset that is suitable
                                                                     for human viewing and analysis.
                                                                     N2: The fidelity of events varies based on
                                                                     many factors. Anomalies may have benign
                                                                     or malicious foundations. Some incidents
                                                                     are relatively easy to find amid the noise,
                                                                     while others require deep, specialized
                                                                     technical knowledge and experience.
                                                                     N3: CTI can be invaluable in detecting
                                                                     malicious activity early, reducing its impact,
                                                                     and shortening recovery time. Signs of an
                                                                     incident may be more obvious later in the
                                                                     attack life cycle, but the incident’s impact
                                                                     and scope may be much larger.
                                                                     R2: Organizations should strive to find
                                                                     incidents earlier in the attack life cycle and
                                                                     take a proactive approach to incident
                                                                     detection and response.
 DE.AE-02          Potentially adverse events are         High       R1: Use tools (e.g., security information
                   analyzed to better understand                     and event management [SIEM]; security
                   associated activities                             orchestration, automation, and response
                                                                     [SOAR]) to continuously monitor log events
                                                                     for known malicious and suspicious activity
                                                                     and to generate reports on their findings.
                                                                     R2: Utilize up-to-date CTI in log analysis
                                                                     tools to improve detection accuracy and
                                                                     characterize threat actors, their methods,
                                                                     and indicators of compromise.
                                                                     R3: Regularly conduct manual reviews of
                                                                     log events for technologies that cannot be
                                                                     sufficiently monitored through automation.
 DE.AE-03          Information is correlated from         High       R1: Constantly transfer the log data
                   multiple sources                                  generated by other sources to a relatively
                                                                     small number of log servers.
                                                                     R2: Use event correlation technology (e.g.,
                                                                     SIEM, SOAR) to gather pieces of related
                                                                     data captured by multiple sources.
                                                                     R3: Utilize CTI to help correlate events
                                                                     among log sources.




                                                     25
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                        Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                             Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                 Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 DE.AE-04          The estimated impact and scope          High       R1: Estimate the impact and scope of
                   of adverse events are                              adverse events through automated (e.g.,
                   understood                                         SIEM, SOAR) and/or manual means, and
                                                                      review and refine the estimates.
 DE.AE-06          Information on adverse events is        High       R1: Generate alerts and provide them to
                   provided to authorized staff and                   cybersecurity and incident response tools
                   tools                                              and staff (e.g., the SOC and incident
                                                                      responders).
                                                                      R2: Make log analysis findings accessible to
                                                                      incident responders and other authorized
                                                                      personnel at all times.
                                                                      R3: Consider automatically creating and
                                                                      assigning tickets in the organization’s
                                                                      ticketing system when certain types of
                                                                      alerts occur.
 DE.AE-07          Cyber threat intelligence and           High       R1: Integrate up-to-date CTI and other
                   other contextual information are                   contextual information (e.g., asset
                   integrated into the analysis                       inventories) into adverse event analysis to
                                                                      improve detection accuracy and
                                                                      characterize threat actors, their methods,
                                                                      and indicators of compromise.
                                                                      R2: Rapidly acquire and analyze
                                                                      vulnerability disclosures for the
                                                                      organization’s technologies from suppliers,
                                                                      vendors, and third-party security
                                                                      advisories.
                                                                      N1: See [SP800-150] for guidelines on
                                                                      consuming, using, and storing CTIs, as well
                                                                      as establishing CTI relationships.
 DE.AE-08          Incidents are declared when             High       R1: Apply incident criteria to known and
                   adverse events meet the defined                    assumed characteristics of analyzed
                   incident criteria                                  activity, and consider known false positives
                                                                      to determine whether an incident should
                                                                      be declared.
 RS (Respond)      Actions regarding a detected            High       N1: The Respond Function is at the core of
                   cybersecurity incident are taken                   incident response activities.
 RS.MA (Incident   Responses to detected                   High       N1: Incident management involves
 Management)       cybersecurity incidents are                        overseeing responses to all incidents and
                   managed                                            shifting priorities and resources as needed.
                                                                      Evaluating the overall risk from an incident
                                                                      and applying the appropriate prioritization
                                                                      are perhaps the most critical decision
                                                                      points in the incident response process.
                                                                      R1: Because of resource limitations,
                                                                      incidents should not be handled on a first-
                                                                      come, first-served basis.
                                                                      R2: Incident triage, prioritization,
                                                                      escalation, and elevation and decisions
                                                                      regarding when to initiate recovery
                                                                      processes should all be based on a set of
                                                                      risk evaluation factors. This set can range



                                                      26
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                        Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                             Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                 Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                      from simple to incredibly complex,
                                                                      depending on the needs and maturity of an
                                                                      organization.
                                                                      N2: Examples of possible risk evaluation
                                                                      factors include asset criticality, functional
                                                                      impact of the incident, data impact of the
                                                                      incident, stage of observed activity, threat
                                                                      actor characterization, and recoverability.
                                                                      R3: The incident response status should be
                                                                      tracked for each incident along with
                                                                      pertinent information, such as an incident
                                                                      summary, indicators of compromise related
                                                                      to the incident, the status and expected
                                                                      time frame for each assigned action, and
                                                                      next steps to be taken.
 RS.MA-01          The incident response plan is           High       R1: Detection technologies should
                   executed in coordination with                      automatically report incidents that they
                   relevant third parties once an                     have confirmed.
                   incident is declared                               C1: Consider designating an incident lead
                                                                      for each incident.
                                                                      R2: If appropriate, contact the
                                                                      organization’s incident response service
                                                                      provider to request assistance.
                                                                      R3: Initiate execution of other
                                                                      cybersecurity plans as needed (e.g.,
                                                                      business continuity and disaster recovery
                                                                      plans) to support incident response.
 RS.MA-02          Incident reports are triaged and        High       R1: Perform a preliminary review of a new
                   validated                                          incident report to verify that a
                                                                      cybersecurity incident has occurred, then
                                                                      estimate the severity of the incident and
                                                                      the level of urgency needed to respond to
                                                                      it.
                                                                      R2: Have mechanisms in place for third
                                                                      parties to report possible incidents that
                                                                      involve the organization. Reports should be
                                                                      carefully monitored and taken seriously.
                                                                      For example, the organization might be
                                                                      contacted by a party claiming that its
                                                                      systems are being attacked by a system at
                                                                      the organization. External users may report
                                                                      other indicators, such as an unavailable
                                                                      service. Other incident response teams
                                                                      may also report incidents to the
                                                                      organization.
 RS.MA-03          Incidents are categorized and           High       R1: Perform a more detailed review of
                   prioritized                                        incidents to help categorize them by
                                                                      incident type (e.g., data breach,
                                                                      ransomware, account takeover, denial of
                                                                      service).




                                                      27
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                            Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                                 Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                     Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                          R2: Prioritize how quickly incident response
                                                                          should be performed for each incident
                                                                          based on its scope, likely impact, time-
                                                                          critical nature, and resource availability.
                                                                          R3: Select incident response strategies for
                                                                          active incidents by balancing the need to
                                                                          quickly recover from an incident with the
                                                                          need to observe the attacker or conduct a
                                                                          more thorough investigation.
                                                                          N1: Every response strategy decision has
                                                                          trade-offs. For example, a strategy that
                                                                          supports observing the attacker’s behavior
                                                                          or conducting a more thorough
                                                                          investigation may be at odds with the need
                                                                          to quickly return to normal operations.
 RS.MA-04          Incidents are escalated or                  High       N1: Escalation generally refers to
                   elevated as needed                                     increasing resources or time frames, while
                                                                          elevation usually indicates involving a
                                                                          higher level of management in the
                                                                          response efforts.
                                                                          R1: Track and validate the status of all
                                                                          ongoing incidents so that incidents in need
                                                                          of more response resources or a change in
                                                                          response strategy can be identified and the
                                                                          necessary changes initiated rapidly.
 RS.MA-05          The criteria for initiating incident        High       R1: Apply incident recovery criteria to
                   recovery are applied                                   known and assumed characteristics of the
                                                                          incident to determine when an incident’s
                                                                          recovery processes should be initiated.
                                                                          R2: Take the possible operational
                                                                          disruption of incident recovery activities
                                                                          into account to determine when recovery
                                                                          should be initiated.
 RS.AN (Incident   Investigations are conducted to             High       N1: The Incident Analysis Category focuses
 Analysis)         ensure effective response and                          on investigating, determining, and
                   support forensics and recovery                         documenting what has happened during an
                   activities                                             incident, as well as how and why it
                                                                          happened.
 RS.AN-03          Analysis is performed to                    High       R1: Determine the sequence of events that
                   establish what has taken place                         have occurred during the incident and
                   during an incident and the root                        which assets and resources were involved
                   cause of the incident                                  in each of those events.
                                                                          R2: Attempt to determine what
                                                                          vulnerabilities, threats, and threat actors
                                                                          were directly or indirectly involved in the
                                                                          incident.
                                                                          R3: Analyze the incident to find the
                                                                          underlying or systemic root causes.
                                                                          R4: Check any deployed cyber deception
                                                                          technology for additional information on
                                                                          attacker behavior.



                                                          28
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                          Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                               Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                   Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                        N1: This information may also be helpful
                                                                        for identifying weaknesses in cybersecurity
                                                                        risk management that should be addressed
                                                                        to prevent similar incidents from occurring
                                                                        in the future.
 RS.AN-06          Actions performed during an               High       N1: Facts discovered and actions taken
                   investigation are recorded, and                      during incident response tasks can be
                   the records’ integrity and                           recorded by many means, including a paper
                   provenance are preserved                             logbook, audio/video recordings, or
                                                                        automatic session monitoring and logging,
                                                                        as permitted by the organization’s incident
                                                                        response plan and policy.
                                                                        R1: Safeguard the confidentiality and
                                                                        integrity of incident response records, and
                                                                        ensure that only authorized personnel have
                                                                        access.
                                                                        N2: Incident response records can contain
                                                                        sensitive information, such as data on
                                                                        exploited vulnerabilities, recent data
                                                                        breaches, and users who may have
                                                                        performed inappropriate actions. The
                                                                        incident lead is often responsible for
                                                                        ensuring that incident response records are
                                                                        properly safeguarded.
 RS.AN-07          Incident data and metadata are            High       N1: Many incident responses involve the
                   collected, and their integrity and                   collection of incident data and metadata.
                   provenance are preserved                             Formal evidence gathering and handling
                                                                        using chain-of-custody procedures might
                                                                        not be performed for every incident that
                                                                        occurs (e.g., most malware incidents will
                                                                        not result in prosecution). However,
                                                                        collected incident data is still considered
                                                                        evidence, which is defined as “grounds for
                                                                        belief or disbelief; data on which to base
                                                                        proof or to establish truth or falsehood”
                                                                        [SP800-160v1].
                                                                        R1: Collect and retain evidence from an
                                                                        incident in accordance with the
                                                                        organization’s evidence preservation
                                                                        procedures and data retention policies, and
                                                                        consider factors such as the possibility of
                                                                        prosecution, and the cost of retaining the
                                                                        data and the hardware and software
                                                                        needed to access the data in the future.
 RS.AN-08          An incident’s magnitude is                High       N1: Determining the incident’s magnitude
                   estimated and validated                              is often one of the most challenging
                                                                        aspects of incident response.
                                                                        R1: Look for indicators of compromise,
                                                                        evidence of persistence, and other signs of
                                                                        an incident on both the assets known to be
                                                                        targeted and other potential targets.



                                                        29
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                         Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                  Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                       Skipping this activity or performing it in a
                                                                       superficial way may cause underestimation
                                                                       of the incident’s magnitude, thus allowing
                                                                       the incident to continue indefinitely on
                                                                       other targets without the organization’s
                                                                       knowledge or monitoring.
 RS.CO (Incident   Response activities are                  High       N1: Incident response reporting and
 Response          coordinated with internal and                       communication activities tend to fall into
 Reporting and     external stakeholders, as                           four categories. Incident coordination
 Communication)    required by laws, regulations, or                   involves communicating current and
                   policies                                            planned incident response activities for a
                                                                       particular incident among the internal and
                                                                       external parties with incident response
                                                                       roles and responsibilities. Incident
                                                                       notification involves formally informing
                                                                       affected customers, employees, partners,
                                                                       regulators, or others about a data breach
                                                                       or other incident. Public communication
                                                                       involves communicating to the public about
                                                                       the status of a particular incident, such as
                                                                       responding to media inquiries. Incident
                                                                       information sharing involves sharing
                                                                       cybersecurity threat information with
                                                                       others, usually voluntarily, based on
                                                                       activity observed within the organization’s
                                                                       technology assets.
                                                                       R1: Organizations should have mechanisms
                                                                       in place in advance to coordinate with
                                                                       affected parties about incidents when
                                                                       needed.
 RS.CO-02          Internal and external                    High       R1: When an incident is analyzed and
                   stakeholders are notified of                        prioritized, the incident response team
                   incidents                                           should coordinate with the appropriate
                                                                       individuals inside and outside of the
                                                                       organization so that all who need to be
                                                                       involved will play their roles.
                                                                       R2: Follow established procedures
                                                                       concerning incident coordination that
                                                                       include what must be reported to whom
                                                                       and at what times (e.g., initial notification,
                                                                       regular status updates).
                                                                       R3: Perform notifications in compliance
                                                                       with the current incident notification-
                                                                       related laws and regulations that pertain to
                                                                       the organization’s sectors, geographic
                                                                       locations, customer locations, and any
                                                                       other characteristics that apply to the
                                                                       organization. Incident notification is an
                                                                       evolving topic, and new laws and
                                                                       regulations are being established
                                                                       frequently.



                                                       30
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                        Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                             Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                 Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                      R4: Notify affected third parties of data
                                                                      breaches and other cybersecurity incidents
                                                                      in accordance with regulatory, legal, and
                                                                      contractual requirements.
                                                                      R5: Notify law enforcement agencies and
                                                                      regulatory bodies of incidents based on
                                                                      criteria in the incident response plan and
                                                                      management approval. Designated
                                                                      individuals should contact these parties in a
                                                                      manner consistent with the requirements
                                                                      of the law and the organization’s policies
                                                                      and procedures.
 RS.CO-03          Information is shared with              High       N1: Voluntary incident information sharing
                   designated internal and external                   is often mutually beneficial because the
                   stakeholders                                       same threats and attacks simultaneously
                                                                      affect multiple organizations. An example is
                                                                      sharing information about observed TTPs
                                                                      with a sector-specific Information Sharing
                                                                      and Analysis Center (ISAC).
                                                                      N2: Sharing defensive tactics between
                                                                      organizations can enhance overall
                                                                      situational awareness and increase the
                                                                      resiliency of all. There is a cost to threat
                                                                      actors to develop or purchase exploits and
                                                                      to deploy them. The effective identification
                                                                      and dissemination of detection techniques
                                                                      lowers the attackers’ return on investment
                                                                      and increases their costs.
                                                                      N3: Incident handlers might coordinate
                                                                      their efforts with colleagues at partner
                                                                      organizations to share tactical, technical
                                                                      information on mitigating an attack that
                                                                      spans those organizations. The
                                                                      organizations participating in this type of
                                                                      relationship are usually peers without
                                                                      authority over each other. In addition to
                                                                      choosing to share information, they may
                                                                      also pool resources to solve common
                                                                      problems.
                                                                      R1: Securely share information with
                                                                      stakeholders consistent with the
                                                                      organization’s response plans and
                                                                      information sharing agreements, including
                                                                      contracts with suppliers.
                                                                      R2: Regularly update senior leadership on
                                                                      the status of major incidents.
                                                                      R3: Notify human resources when
                                                                      malicious insider activity has occurred.
                                                                      R4: Establish and follow media
                                                                      communications procedures for incident
                                                                      response that comply with the



                                                      31
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                     Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                          Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description              Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                   organization’s policies on media interaction
                                                                   and information disclosure.
 RS.MI (Incident   Activities are performed to          High       N1: Manually selecting containment and
 Mitigation)       prevent expansion of an event                   eradication actions may be easier and
                   and mitigate its effects                        faster if the organization has criteria and
                                                                   procedures in place. Criteria could take the
                                                                   incident type into account (e.g., a cloud-
                                                                   based services compromise or a user
                                                                   endpoint ransomware infection) and use
                                                                   some of the risk evaluation factors in
                                                                   RS.MA. Another factor to consider is the
                                                                   duration of the containment measure (e.g.,
                                                                   an emergency workaround that must be
                                                                   removed within hours, a temporary
                                                                   workaround to be removed within two
                                                                   weeks, or a permanent solution). The
                                                                   eradication measure’s duration could be
                                                                   similarly evaluated.
                                                                   R1: In some instances, organizations
                                                                   redirect an attacker to a sandbox so that
                                                                   they can monitor the attacker’s activity,
                                                                   usually to gather additional evidence. This
                                                                   delays containment and eradication
                                                                   activities. The incident response team
                                                                   should first discuss the feasibility of this
                                                                   strategy with the legal department before
                                                                   executing it. The intentional delay can be
                                                                   dangerous because an attacker could
                                                                   escalate unauthorized access or
                                                                   compromise other systems.
 RS.MI-01          Incidents are contained              High       N1: Containment refers to preventing the
                                                                   expansion of an incident. Containment can
                                                                   prevent additional damage and avoid
                                                                   overwhelming the organization’s resources.
                                                                   Most incidents require some form of
                                                                   containment.
                                                                   C1: Consider configuring cybersecurity
                                                                   technologies (e.g., antivirus software) and
                                                                   the cybersecurity features of other
                                                                   technologies (e.g., operating systems,
                                                                   network infrastructure devices) to
                                                                   automatically perform some containment
                                                                   actions, like quarantining malware,
                                                                   transferring a compromised endpoint to an
                                                                   isolated remediation network, or halting
                                                                   the execution of an infected container.
                                                                   C2: Consider authorizing third parties (e.g.,
                                                                   the organization’s internet service
                                                                   providers and cloud service providers) to
                                                                   automatically act to contain certain types




                                                   32
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                       Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                            Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
                                                                     of incidents (e.g., large-scale DDoS attacks)
                                                                     on behalf of the organization.
                                                                     R1: Allow incident handlers to manually
                                                                     select and perform containment actions
                                                                     instead of or in addition to automated
                                                                     containment measures.
 RS.MI-02          Incidents are eradicated               High       N1: Eradication refers to mitigating an
                                                                     incident’s effects. After containment,
                                                                     eradication may be necessary to eliminate
                                                                     persistence mechanisms and entry points,
                                                                     such as deleting malware, disabling
                                                                     breached user accounts, and identifying
                                                                     and mitigating all exploited vulnerabilities.
                                                                     R1: Identify all affected hosts and services
                                                                     within the organization so that all flaws and
                                                                     weaknesses can be remediated.
                                                                     C1: Consider configuring cybersecurity
                                                                     technologies and the cybersecurity
                                                                     features of other technologies (e.g.,
                                                                     operating systems, network infrastructure
                                                                     devices) to automatically perform some
                                                                     eradication actions.
                                                                     C2: Consider authorizing third parties (e.g.,
                                                                     the organization’s internet service
                                                                     providers and cloud service providers) to
                                                                     automatically act to eradicate certain types
                                                                     of incidents on behalf of the organization.
                                                                     R2: Allow incident handlers to manually
                                                                     select and perform eradication actions
                                                                     instead of or in addition to automated
                                                                     eradication measures.
 RC (Recover)      Assets and operations affected         High       N1: During incident recovery, personnel
                   by a cybersecurity incident are                   restore systems to normal operations,
                   restored                                          confirm that the systems are functioning
                                                                     normally, and (if applicable) remediate
                                                                     vulnerabilities to prevent similar incidents.
                                                                     N2: Recovery operations include restoring
                                                                     systems from clean backups, rebuilding
                                                                     systems, replacing compromised files with
                                                                     clean versions, installing patches, changing
                                                                     passwords, and tightening security
                                                                     controls. In intrusions where the threat
                                                                     actor is highly sophisticated and the full
                                                                     scope of their tactics is not revealed, it may
                                                                     be necessary to go as far as replacing the
                                                                     hardware (e.g., bare metal) of all of the
                                                                     compromised systems.
                                                                     N3: For more information on incident
                                                                     recovery, see [SP800-184].




                                                     33
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                         Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                              Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                  Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 RC.RP (Incident   Restoration activities are               High       N1: Executing the incident recovery plan
 Recovery Plan     performed to ensure operational                     involves selecting, prioritizing, and
 Execution)        availability of systems and                         performing recovery actions in a secure
                   services affected by                                manner; verifying the integrity of
                   cybersecurity incidents                             recovered assets; declaring the end of
                                                                       incident recovery; and completing incident
                                                                       documentation.
                                                                       N2: For more information on incident
                                                                       recovery plans and plan execution, see
                                                                       [SP800-184].
 RC.RP-01          The recovery portion of the              High       R1: Begin recovery procedures during or
                   incident response plan is                           after incident response processes.
                   executed once initiated from the                    R2: Inform all individuals with recovery
                   incident response process                           responsibilities about the plans for
                                                                       recovery and the authorizations required to
                                                                       implement each aspect of the plans.
 RC.RP-02          Recovery actions are selected,           High       R1: Recovery actions should take
                   scoped, prioritized, and                            timeliness, precision, and reliability (e.g.,
                   performed                                           restoring only the affected files versus
                                                                       restoring all files) into account.
                                                                       R2: Select recovery actions based on the
                                                                       criteria defined in the incident response
                                                                       plan and available resources.
                                                                       R3: Change planned recovery actions based
                                                                       on a reassessment of organizational needs
                                                                       and resources.
 RC.RP-03          The integrity of backups and             High       R1: Check restoration assets for indicators
                   other restoration assets is                         of compromise, file corruption, and other
                   verified before using them for                      integrity issues before use.
                   restoration
 RC.RP-04          Critical mission functions and           High       R1: Validate that essential services are
                   cybersecurity risk management                       restored in the appropriate order.
                   are considered to establish post-                   R2: Work with system owners to confirm
                   incident operational norms                          the successful restoration of systems and
                                                                       the return to normal operations.
                                                                       R3: Monitor the performance of restored
                                                                       systems to verify the adequacy of the
                                                                       restoration.
 RC.RP-05          The integrity of restored assets         High       R1: Check restored assets for indicators of
                   is verified, systems and services                   compromise, and remediate the root
                   are restored, and normal                            causes of the incident before production
                   operating status is confirmed                       use.
                                                                       R2: Verify the correctness and adequacy of
                                                                       the restoration actions taken before
                                                                       putting a restored system online.
 RC.RP-06          The end of incident recovery is          High       R1: Prepare an after-action report that
                   declared based on criteria, and                     documents the incident itself, the response
                   incident-related documentation                      and recovery actions taken, and lessons
                   is completed                                        learned.




                                                       34
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                        Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                             Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

 CSF Element       CSF Element Description                 Priority   Recommendations, Considerations, Notes
 RC.CO (Incident   Restoration activities are              High       N1: Incident recovery communication is a
 Recovery          coordinated with internal and                      continuation of the communication
 Communication)    external parties                                   activities in RS.CO.
 RC.CO-03          Recovery activities and progress        High       R1: Securely share recovery information,
                   in restoring operational                           including restoration progress, consistent
                   capabilities are communicated                      with response plans and information
                   to designated internal and                         sharing agreements.
                   external stakeholders                              R2: Regularly update senior leadership on
                                                                      recovery status and restoration progress
                                                                      for major incidents.
                                                                      R3: Follow the rules and protocols defined
                                                                      in contracts for incident information
                                                                      sharing between the organization and its
                                                                      suppliers.
                                                                      R4: Coordinate crisis communication
                                                                      between the organization and its critical
                                                                      suppliers.
 RC.CO-04          Public updates on incident              High       R1: Follow the organization’s breach
                   recovery are shared using                          notification procedures for recovering from
                   approved methods and                               a data breach incident.
                   messaging                                          R2: Explain the steps being taken to
                                                                      recover from the incident and to prevent a
                                                                      recurrence.




                                                      35
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management



References
[CISA-PB]          Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (2021) Cybersecurity Incident
                   & Vulnerability Response Playbooks: Operational Procedures for Planning and
                   Conducting Cybersecurity Incident and Vulnerability Response Activities in
                   FCEB Information Systems. (Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency,
                   Arlington, VA). Available at
                   https://www.cisa.gov/sites/default/files/publications/Federal_Government_Cy
                   bersecurity_Incident_and_Vulnerability_Response_Playbooks_508C.pdf
[CNSSI-4009]       Committee on National Security Systems (2022) Committee on National
                   Security Systems (CNSS) Glossary. (National Security Agency, Ft. Meade, MD).
                   Committee on National Security Systems Instruction (CNSSI) 4009. Available at
                   https://www.cnss.gov/CNSS/issuances/instructions.cfm
[CSF2.0]           National Institute of Standards and Technology (2024) The NIST Cybersecurity
                   Framework (CSF) 2.0. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                   Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) NIST CSWP 29.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.29
[CSWP32]           Pascoe C, Snyder JN, Scarfone K (2024) NIST Cybersecurity Framework 2.0: A
                   Guide to Creating Community Profiles. (National Institute of Standards and
                   Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Cybersecurity White Paper (CSWP) NIST
                   CSWP 32. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.CSWP.32.ipd
[FISMA2014]        Federal Information Security Modernization Act of 2014, Pub. L. 113-283, 128
                   Stat. 3073. Available at https://www.govinfo.gov/app/details/PLAW-
                   113publ283
[IR8286]           Stine KM, Quinn SD, Witte GA, Gardner RK (2020) Integrating Cybersecurity
                   and Enterprise Risk Management (ERM). (National Institute of Standards and
                   Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Interagency or Internal Report (IR) NIST
                   IR 8286. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8286
[SP800-30r1]       Joint Task Force Transformation Initiative (2012) Guide for Conducting Risk
                   Assessments. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg,
                   MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-30r1.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-30r1
[SP800-37r2]       Joint Task Force (2018) Risk Management Framework for Information Systems
                   and Organizations: A System Life Cycle Approach for Security and Privacy.
                   (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST
                   Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-37r2.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-37r2




                                                36
NIST SP 800-61r3                                               Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                    Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

[SP800-61r2]       Cichonski PR, Millar T, Grance T, Scarfone KA (2012) Computer Security
                   Incident Handling Guide. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                   Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-61r2.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-61r2
[SP800-84]         Grance T, Nolan T, Burke K, Dudley R, White G, Good T (2006) Guide to Test,
                   Training, and Exercise Programs for IT Plans and Capabilities. (National
                   Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special
                   Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-84. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-84
[SP800-92r1]       Scarfone K, Souppaya M (2023) Cybersecurity Log Management Planning
                   Guide. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD),
                   NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-92r1 ipd.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-92r1.ipd
[SP800-150]        Johnson CS, Waltermire DA, Badger ML, Skorupka C, Snyder J (2016) Guide to
                   Cyber Threat Information Sharing. (National Institute of Standards and
                   Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-150.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-150
[SP800-160v1] Ross RS, McEvilley M, Winstead M (2022) Engineering Trustworthy Secure
              Systems. (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD),
              NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-160v1r1.
              https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-160v1r1
[SP800-184]        Bartock MJ, Scarfone KA, Smith MC, Witte GA, Cichonski JA, Souppaya MP
                   (2016) Guide for Cybersecurity Event Recovery. (National Institute of Standards
                   and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-
                   184. https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-184
[SP800-216]        Schaffer KB, Mell PM, Trinh H, Van Wyk I (2023) Recommendations for Federal
                   Vulnerability Disclosure Guidelines. (National Institute of Standards and
                   Technology, Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-216.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-216
[SP800-218]        Souppaya MP, Scarfone KA, Dodson DF (2022) Secure Software Development
                   Framework (SSDF) Version 1.1: Recommendations for Mitigating the Risk of
                   Software Vulnerabilities. (National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                   Gaithersburg, MD), NIST Special Publication (SP) NIST SP 800-218.
                   https://doi.org/10.6028/NIST.SP.800-218




                                                 37
NIST SP 800-61r3                                            Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                 Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Appendix A. List of Symbols, Abbreviations, and Acronyms
CISA
Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency

CPRT
Cybersecurity and Privacy Reference Tool

CSF
Cybersecurity Framework

CSP
Cloud Service Provider

CTI
Cyber Threat Intelligence

ISAC
Information Sharing and Analysis Center

ISP
Internet Service Provider

MOU
Memorandum of Understanding

MSSP
Managed Security Services Provider

NDA
Non-Disclosure Agreement

SIEM
Security Information and Event Management

SOAR
Security Orchestration, Automation, and Response

SOC
Security Operations Center

SOP
Standard Operating Procedures

TTPs
Tactics, Techniques, and Procedures




                                                   38
NIST SP 800-61r3                                                           Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                                Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Appendix B. Glossary
adverse cybersecurity event
Any event with a potentially negative impact on cybersecurity.

computer security incident
See cybersecurity incident.

cyber threat intelligence
Cyber threat information that has been aggregated, transformed, analyzed, interpreted, or enriched to provide the
necessary context for decision-making processes. [SP800-150, adapted]

cybersecurity incident
An occurrence that actually or imminently jeopardizes, without lawful authority, the integrity, confidentiality, or
availability of information or an information system; or constitutes a violation or imminent threat of violation of
law, security policies, security procedures, or acceptable use policies. [FISMA2014]

event
Any observable occurrence involving computing assets, including physical and virtual platforms, networks, services,
and cloud environments.

incident
See cybersecurity incident.

incident response
The remediation or mitigation of violations of security policies and recommended practices. [FISMA2014]

indicators of compromise
Technical artifacts or observables that suggest that an attack is imminent or is currently underway or that a
compromise may have already occurred. [SP800-150, adapted]

tactics, techniques, and procedures
The behavior of an actor. A tactic is the highest-level description of this behavior, while techniques give a more
detailed description of behavior in the context of a tactic, and procedures an even lower-level, highly detailed
description in the context of a technique. [SP800-150]

threat
Any circumstance or event with the potential to adversely impact organizational operations (including mission,
functions, image, or reputation), organizational assets, individuals, other organizations, or the Nation through an
information system via unauthorized access, destruction, disclosure, or modification of information, and/or denial
of service. [SP800-30r1]

vulnerability
A weakness in a system, system security procedures, internal controls, or implementation by which an actor or
event may intentionally exploit or accidentally trigger the weakness to access, modify, or disrupt the normal
operations of a system, resulting in a security incident or violation of the system’s security policy. [CNSSI-4009,
adapted]




                                                          39
NIST SP 800-61r3                                              Incident Response Recommendations and
April 2025                                                   Considerations for Cyber Risk Management

Appendix C. Change Log
This publication revises the previous version, NIST SP 800-61 Revision 2 (2012), as follows:
    •   Performed a full rewrite of the previous content to improve clarity and usability and to
        remove outdated material and material addressed in more depth in other NIST
        publications and other federal agency content
    •   Shifted the focus of the document from guidelines on detecting, analyzing, prioritizing,
        and handling incidents to recommendations and considerations for incorporating
        cybersecurity incident response considerations throughout an organization’s
        cybersecurity risk management activities
    •   Reorganized the contents to comprise a CSF 2.0 Community Profile
    •   Moved most hyperlinks to a new SP 800-61 project website to facilitate their
        maintenance
    •   Reformatted all content to follow the latest NIST technical report template




                                                40
